docs/source/Install.rst, before:

Installation instructions
=========================

.. note:: Run these commands from your terminal

Step 1: Set up a virtual python environment
----------------------------------------------

MapReader requires python version 3.7+. 

Method 1: Using conda (recommended)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We recommend installing MapReader using either Anaconda (`installation instructions here <https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/>`__) or miniconda (`installation instructions here <https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html>`__.
A discussion of which of these to choose can be found `here <https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/stable/user-guide/install/download.html>`__.

Once you have installed either Ananconda or miniconda, open your terminal and use the following commands to set up your virtual python environment:

-  Create a new conda environment for ``mapreader`` (you can call this what you like, we use ``mr_pyXX`` where ``XX`` is your python version):

   .. code-block:: bash

      conda create -n mr_py38 python=3.8

   This will create a conda enviroment which uses python version 3.8. 

-  Activate your conda environment:

   .. code-block:: bash

      conda activate mr_py38

Method 2: Using venv or other
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you would like not to use conda, you are more than welcome to set up a virtual python environment using other methods.

For example, if you would like to use venv, open your terminal and use the following commands to set up your virtual python environment:

-  First, importantly, check which version of python your system is using:

   .. code-block:: bash

      python3 --version

   If this returns a version below 3.7, you will need download an updated python version. 
   You can do this by donwloading from `here <https://www.python.org/downloads/>`__ (make sure you download the right one for your operating system).

   You should then run the above command again to check your python version has updated.

-  Create a new virtual python environment for ``mapreader`` (you can call this what you like, we recommend ``mr_pyXX`` where ``XX`` is your python version):

   .. code-block:: bash
      
      python3 -m venv mr_py38

-  Activate your virtual environment:

      source mr_py38/bin/activate

Step 2: Install MapReader
--------------------------

Method 1: Install from `PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/mapreader/>`_
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Install ``mapreader``:

   .. code-block:: bash

      pip install mapreader 

Method 2: Install from source
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Clone the ``mapreader`` source code from the `MapReader GitHub repository <https://github.com/Living-with-machines/MapReader>`_:

   .. code-block:: bash

      git clone https://github.com/Living-with-machines/MapReader.git 

-  Install ``mapreader``:

   .. code-block:: bash

      cd MapReader
      pip install -v -e .

Step 3 (Optional): Add virtual python environment to notebooks
----------------------------------------------------------------

- To allow the newly created python virtual environment to show up in jupyter notebooks, run the following command:

   .. code-block:: bash
   
      python -m ipykernel install --user --name mr_py38 --display-name "Python (mr_py38)"

.. note:: if you have used a different name for your python virtual environment replace the ``mr_py38`` with whatever name you have used.

Troubleshooting
----------------

M1 mac
~~~~~~~

If you are using an M1 mac and are having issues installing MapReader due to an error when installing numpy or scikit-image:

-  Try separately installing the problem packages (edit as needed) and then installing MapReader:
   
   .. code-block:: bash

      pip install numpy==1.21.5
      pip install scikit-image==0.18.3
      pip install mapreader

-  Try using conda to install the problem packages (edit as needed) and then pip to install MapReader:

   .. code-block:: bash

      conda install numpy==1.21.5
      conda install scikit-image==0.18.3
      pip install mapreader

-  Alternatively, you can try using a different version of openBLAS when installing:

   .. code-block:: bash

      brew install openblas
      OPENBLAS="$(brew --prefix openblas)" pip install mapreader

We are also working on making MapReader a conda package so you should soon be able to conda install MapReader.

Commit message:

Comments/updates from meeting with Jon

docs/source/Install.rst, after:

Installation instructions
=========================

.. note:: Run these commands from your terminal.

.. TODO: Add comments about how to get to conda in Windows

Step 1: Set up a virtual python environment
----------------------------------------------

MapReader requires python version 3.7+. 

Method 1: Using conda (recommended)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We recommend installing MapReader using either Anaconda (`installation instructions here <https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/>`__) or miniconda (`installation instructions here <https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html>`__).
A discussion of which of these to choose can be found `here <https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/stable/user-guide/install/download.html>`__.

Once you have installed either Ananconda or miniconda, open your terminal and use the following commands to set up your virtual python environment:

-  Create a new conda environment for ``mapreader`` (you can call this what you like, we use ``mr_pyXX`` where ``XX`` is your python version):

   .. code-block:: bash

      conda create -n mr_py38 python=3.8

   This will create a conda enviroment which uses python version 3.8. 

-  Activate your conda environment:

   .. code-block:: bash

      conda activate mr_py38

Method 2: Using venv or other
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you would like not to use conda, you are more than welcome to set up a virtual python environment using other methods.

For example, if you would like to use venv, open your terminal and use the following commands to set up your virtual python environment:

-  First, importantly, check which version of python your system is using:

   .. code-block:: bash

      python3 --version

   If this returns a version below 3.7, you will need download an updated python version. 
   You can do this by donwloading from `here <https://www.python.org/downloads/>`__ (make sure you download the right one for your operating system).

   You should then run the above command again to check your python version has updated.

-  Create a new virtual python environment for ``mapreader`` (you can call this what you like, we recommend ``mr_pyXX`` where ``XX`` is your python version):

   .. code-block:: bash
      
      python3 -m venv mr_py38

-  Activate your virtual environment:

      source mr_py38/bin/activate

Step 2: Install MapReader
--------------------------

Method 1: Install from `PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/mapreader/>`_
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Install ``mapreader``:

   .. code-block:: bash

      pip install mapreader 

Method 2: Install from source
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. TODO: You will need to install git on windows (can be done via conda - but need to look for alternatives)

-  Clone the ``mapreader`` source code from the `MapReader GitHub repository <https://github.com/Living-with-machines/MapReader>`_:

   .. code-block:: bash

      git clone https://github.com/Living-with-machines/MapReader.git 

-  Install ``mapreader``:

   .. code-block:: bash

      cd MapReader
      pip install -v -e .

Step 3: Add virtual python environment to notebooks
------------------------------------------------------

- To allow the newly created python virtual environment to show up in jupyter notebooks, run the following command:

   .. code-block:: bash
   
      python -m ipykernel install --user --name mr_py38 --display-name "Python (mr_py38)"

.. note:: if you have used a differe nt name for your python virtual environment replace the ``mr_py38`` with whatever name you have used.

Troubleshooting
----------------

M1 mac
~~~~~~~

If you are using an M1 mac and are having issues installing MapReader due to an error when installing numpy or scikit-image:

-  Try separately installing the problem packages (edit as needed) and then installing MapReader:
   
   .. code-block:: bash

      pip install numpy==1.21.5
      pip install scikit-image==0.18.3
      pip install mapreader

-  Try using conda to install the problem packages (edit as needed) and then pip to install MapReader:

   .. code-block:: bash

      conda install numpy==1.21.5
      conda install scikit-image==0.18.3
      pip install mapreader

-  Alternatively, you can try using a different version of openBLAS when installing:

   .. code-block:: bash

      brew install openblas
      OPENBLAS="$(brew --prefix openblas)" pip install mapreader

We are also working on making MapReader a conda package so you should soon be able to conda install MapReader.
