docs/source/User-guide/Annotate.rst, before:

Annotate
=========

.. note:: You will need to update file paths to reflect your own machine's directory structure.

MapReader's ``Annotate`` subpackage is used to interactively annotate images (e.g. maps).

.. _Annotate_images:

Annotate your images
----------------------

.. note:: Run these commands in a Jupyter notebook (or other IDE), ensuring you are in your `mr_py38` python environment.


To prepare your annotations, you must specify a number of parameters when initializing the Annotator class.
We will use a 'rail_space' annotation task to demonstrate how to set up the annotator.

The simplest way to initialize your annotator is to provide file paths for your patches and parent images using the ``patch_paths`` and ``parent_paths`` arguments, respectively.
e.g. :

.. code-block:: python

    from mapreader import Annotator

    # EXAMPLE
    annotator = Annotator(
        patch_paths="./patches_100_pixel/*.png",
        parent_paths="./maps/*.png",
        metadata="./maps/metadata.csv",
        annotations_dir="./annotations",
        task_name="railspace",
        labels=["no_rail_space", "rail_space"],
        username="rosie",
    )

Alternatively, if you have created/saved a ``patch_df`` and ``parent_df`` from MapReader's Load subpackage, you can replace the ``patch_paths`` and ``parent_paths`` arguments with ``patch_df`` and ``parent_df`` arguments, respectively.
e.g. :

.. code-block:: python

    from mapreader import Annotator

    # EXAMPLE
    annotator = Annotator(
        patch_df="./patch_df.csv",
        parent_df="./parent_df.csv",
        annotations_dir="./annotations",
        task_name="railspace",
        labels=["no_rail_space", "rail_space"],
        username="rosie",
    )

.. note:: You can pass either a pandas DataFrame or the path to a csv file as the ``patch_df`` and ``parent_df`` arguments.

In the above examples, the following parameters are also specified:

- ``annotations_dir``: The directory where your annotations will be saved (e.g., ``"./annotations"``).
- ``task_name``: The specific annotation task you want to perform, in this case ``"railspace"``.
- ``labels``: A list of labels for the annotation task, such as ``"no_rail_space"`` and ``"rail_space"``.
- ``username``: Your unique identifier, which can be any string (e.g., ``"rosie"``).

Other arguments that you may want to be aware of when initializing the ``Annotator`` instance include:

- ``show_context``: Whether to show a context image in the annotation interface (default: ``False``).
- ``sortby``: The name of the column to use to sort the patch Dataframe (e.g. "mean_pixel_R" to sort by red pixel intensities).
- ``delimiter``: The delimiter to use when reading your data files (default: ``","`` for csv).

After setting up the ``Annotator`` instance, you can interactively annotate a sample of your images using:

.. code-block:: python

    annotator.annotate()

Context
~~~~~~~

To help with annotating, you can set the annotation interface to show a context image using ``show_context=True``.
This creates a panel of patches in the annotation interface, highlighting your patch in the middle of its surrounding immediate images.
You can either pass the ``show_context`` argument when initializing the ``Annotator`` instance:

.. code-block:: python

    # EXAMPLE
    annotator = Annotator(
        patch_df="./patch_df.csv",
        parent_df="./parent_df.csv",
        annotations_dir="./annotations",
        task_name="railspace",
        labels=["no_rail_space", "rail_space"],
        username="rosie",
        show_context=True,
    )

    annotator.annotate()

Or, you can pass the ``show_context`` argument when calling the ``annotate`` method:

.. code-block:: python

    annotator.annotate(show_context=True)

This will overwrite the ``show_context`` argument passed when initializing the ``Annotator`` instance.

Sort order
~~~~~~~~~~

By default, your patches will be shown to you in a random order but, to help with annotating, they can be sorted using the ``sortby`` argument.
This argument takes the name of a column in your patch DataFrame and sorts the patches by the values in that column.
e.g. :

.. code-block:: python

    # EXAMPLE
    annotator = Annotator(
        patch_df="./patch_df.csv",
        parent_df="./parent_df.csv",
        annotations_dir="./annotations"m
        task_name="railspace",
        labels=["no_rail_space", "rail_space"],
        username="rosie",
        sortby="mean_pixel_R",
    )

This will sort your patches by the mean red pixel intensity in each patch, by default, in ascending order.
This is particularly useful if your images (e.g. maps) have collars, margins or blank regions that you would like to avoid.

.. note:: If you would like to sort in descending order, you can also pass ``ascending=False``.

You can also specify ``min_values`` and ``max_values`` to limit the range of values shown to you.
e.g. To sort your patches by the mean red pixel intensity in each patch but only show you patches with a mean blue pixel intensity between 0.5 and 0.9.

.. code-block:: python

    # EXAMPLE
    annotator = Annotator(
        patch_df="./patch_df.csv",
        parent_df="./parent_df.csv",
        annotations_dir="./annotations",
        task_name="railspace",
        labels=["no_rail_space", "rail_space"],
        username="rosie",
        sortby="mean_pixel_R",
        min_values={"mean_pixel_B": 0.5},
        max_values={"mean_pixel_B": 0.9},
    )

.. _Save_annotations:

Save your annotations
----------------------

Your annotations are automatically saved as you're making progress through the annotation task as a ``csv`` file (unless you've set the ``auto_save`` keyword argument to ``False`` when you set up the ``Annotator`` instance).

If you need to know the name of the annotations file, you may refer to a property on your ``Annotator`` instance:

.. code-block:: python

    annotator.annotations_file

The file will be located in the ``annotations_dir`` that you may have passed as a keyword argument when you set up the ``Annotator`` instance.
If you didn't provide a keyword argument, it will be in the ``./annotations`` directory.

For example, if you have downloaded your maps using the default settings of our ``Download`` subpackage or have set up your directory as recommended in our `Input Guidance <https://mapreader.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Input-guidance.html>`__, and then saved your patches using the default settings:

::

    project
    ├──your_notebook.ipynb
    └──maps
    │   ├── map1.png
    │   ├── map2.png
    │   ├── map3.png
    │   ├── ...
    │   └── metadata.csv
    └──patches
    │   ├── patch-0-100-#map1.png#.png
    │   ├── patch-100-200-#map1.png#.png
    │   ├── patch-200-300-#map1.png#.png
    │   └── ...
    └──annotations
	    └──rail_space_#rosie#-123hjkfr298jIUHfs808da.csv

Commit message:

add surrounding arg to docs

docs/source/User-guide/Annotate.rst, after:

Annotate
=========

.. note:: You will need to update file paths to reflect your own machine's directory structure.

MapReader's ``Annotate`` subpackage is used to interactively annotate images (e.g. maps).

.. _Annotate_images:

Annotate your images
----------------------

.. note:: Run these commands in a Jupyter notebook (or other IDE), ensuring you are in your `mr_py38` python environment.


To prepare your annotations, you must specify a number of parameters when initializing the Annotator class.
We will use a 'rail_space' annotation task to demonstrate how to set up the annotator.

The simplest way to initialize your annotator is to provide file paths for your patches and parent images using the ``patch_paths`` and ``parent_paths`` arguments, respectively.
e.g. :

.. code-block:: python

    from mapreader import Annotator

    # EXAMPLE
    annotator = Annotator(
        patch_paths="./patches_100_pixel/*.png",
        parent_paths="./maps/*.png",
        metadata="./maps/metadata.csv",
        annotations_dir="./annotations",
        task_name="railspace",
        labels=["no_rail_space", "rail_space"],
        username="rosie",
    )

Alternatively, if you have created/saved a ``patch_df`` and ``parent_df`` from MapReader's Load subpackage, you can replace the ``patch_paths`` and ``parent_paths`` arguments with ``patch_df`` and ``parent_df`` arguments, respectively.
e.g. :

.. code-block:: python

    from mapreader import Annotator

    # EXAMPLE
    annotator = Annotator(
        patch_df="./patch_df.csv",
        parent_df="./parent_df.csv",
        annotations_dir="./annotations",
        task_name="railspace",
        labels=["no_rail_space", "rail_space"],
        username="rosie",
    )

.. note:: You can pass either a pandas DataFrame or the path to a csv file as the ``patch_df`` and ``parent_df`` arguments.

In the above examples, the following parameters are also specified:

- ``annotations_dir``: The directory where your annotations will be saved (e.g., ``"./annotations"``).
- ``task_name``: The specific annotation task you want to perform, in this case ``"railspace"``.
- ``labels``: A list of labels for the annotation task, such as ``"no_rail_space"`` and ``"rail_space"``.
- ``username``: Your unique identifier, which can be any string (e.g., ``"rosie"``).

Other arguments that you may want to be aware of when initializing the ``Annotator`` instance include:

- ``show_context``: Whether to show a context image in the annotation interface (default: ``False``).
- ``surrounding``: How many surrounding patches to show in the context image (default: ``1``).
- ``sortby``: The name of the column to use to sort the patch Dataframe (e.g. "mean_pixel_R" to sort by red pixel intensities).
- ``delimiter``: The delimiter to use when reading your data files (default: ``","`` for csv).

After setting up the ``Annotator`` instance, you can interactively annotate a sample of your images using:

.. code-block:: python

    annotator.annotate()

Context
~~~~~~~

To help with annotating, you can set the annotation interface to show a context image using ``show_context=True``.
This creates a panel of patches in the annotation interface, highlighting your patch in the middle of its surrounding immediate images.
You can either pass the ``show_context`` argument when initializing the ``Annotator`` instance:

.. code-block:: python

    # EXAMPLE
    annotator = Annotator(
        patch_df="./patch_df.csv",
        parent_df="./parent_df.csv",
        annotations_dir="./annotations",
        task_name="railspace",
        labels=["no_rail_space", "rail_space"],
        username="rosie",
        show_context=True,
    )

    annotator.annotate()

Or, you can pass the ``show_context`` argument when calling the ``annotate`` method:

.. code-block:: python

    annotator.annotate(show_context=True)

This will overwrite the ``show_context`` argument passed when initializing the ``Annotator`` instance.

By default, your ``Annotator`` will show one surrounding patch in the context image.
You can change this by passing the ``surrounding`` argument when initializing the ``Annotator`` instance and/or when calling the ``annotate`` method.

e.g. to show two surrounding patches in the context image:

.. code-block:: python

    annotator.annotate(show_context=True, surrounding=2)

Sort order
~~~~~~~~~~

By default, your patches will be shown to you in a random order but, to help with annotating, they can be sorted using the ``sortby`` argument.
This argument takes the name of a column in your patch DataFrame and sorts the patches by the values in that column.
e.g. :

.. code-block:: python

    # EXAMPLE
    annotator = Annotator(
        patch_df="./patch_df.csv",
        parent_df="./parent_df.csv",
        annotations_dir="./annotations"m
        task_name="railspace",
        labels=["no_rail_space", "rail_space"],
        username="rosie",
        sortby="mean_pixel_R",
    )

This will sort your patches by the mean red pixel intensity in each patch, by default, in ascending order.
This is particularly useful if your images (e.g. maps) have collars, margins or blank regions that you would like to avoid.

.. note:: If you would like to sort in descending order, you can also pass ``ascending=False``.

You can also specify ``min_values`` and ``max_values`` to limit the range of values shown to you.
e.g. To sort your patches by the mean red pixel intensity in each patch but only show you patches with a mean blue pixel intensity between 0.5 and 0.9.

.. code-block:: python

    # EXAMPLE
    annotator = Annotator(
        patch_df="./patch_df.csv",
        parent_df="./parent_df.csv",
        annotations_dir="./annotations",
        task_name="railspace",
        labels=["no_rail_space", "rail_space"],
        username="rosie",
        sortby="mean_pixel_R",
        min_values={"mean_pixel_B": 0.5},
        max_values={"mean_pixel_B": 0.9},
    )

.. _Save_annotations:

Save your annotations
----------------------

Your annotations are automatically saved as you're making progress through the annotation task as a ``csv`` file (unless you've set the ``auto_save`` keyword argument to ``False`` when you set up the ``Annotator`` instance).

If you need to know the name of the annotations file, you may refer to a property on your ``Annotator`` instance:

.. code-block:: python

    annotator.annotations_file

The file will be located in the ``annotations_dir`` that you may have passed as a keyword argument when you set up the ``Annotator`` instance.
If you didn't provide a keyword argument, it will be in the ``./annotations`` directory.

For example, if you have downloaded your maps using the default settings of our ``Download`` subpackage or have set up your directory as recommended in our `Input Guidance <https://mapreader.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Input-guidance.html>`__, and then saved your patches using the default settings:

::

    project
    ├──your_notebook.ipynb
    └──maps
    │   ├── map1.png
    │   ├── map2.png
    │   ├── map3.png
    │   ├── ...
    │   └── metadata.csv
    └──patches
    │   ├── patch-0-100-#map1.png#.png
    │   ├── patch-100-200-#map1.png#.png
    │   ├── patch-200-300-#map1.png#.png
    │   └── ...
    └──annotations
	    └──rail_space_#rosie#-123hjkfr298jIUHfs808da.csv
