docs/source/using-mapreader/step-by-step-guide/2-load.rst, before:

Load
=====

.. note:: Run these commands in a Jupyter notebook (or other IDE), ensuring you are in your ``mr_py38`` Python environment.

.. note:: You will need to update file paths to reflect your own machines directory structure.

MapReader's ``Load`` subpackage is used to load, visualize and patchify images (e.g. maps) saved locally.

Load images (and metadata)
----------------------------

First, images (e.g. png, jpeg, tiff or geotiff files) can be loaded in using MapReader's ``loader`` function.

This can be done using:

.. code-block:: python

    from mapreader import loader

    my_files = loader("./path/to/files/*.png")

or

.. code-block:: python

    from mapreader import loader

    my_files = loader("./path/to/files/", file_ext="png")

For example, if you have downloaded your maps using the default settings of our ``Download`` subpackage or have set up your directory as recommended in our :doc:`Input Guidance </using-mapreader/input-guidance/index>`:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    my_files = loader("./maps/*.png")

or

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    my_files = loader("./maps", file_ext="png")

The ``loader`` function creates a ``MapImages`` object (``my_files``) which contains information about your map images.
To see the contents of this object, use:

.. code-block:: python

    print(my_files)

You will see that your ``MapImages`` object contains the files you have loaded and that these are labelled as 'parents'.

If your image files are georeferenced and already contain metadata (e.g. geoTIFFs), you can add this metadata into your ``MapImages`` object using:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.add_geo_info()

.. note:: This function will reproject your coordinates into "EPSG:4326". To change this specify ``target_crs``.

Or, if you have separate metadata (e.g. a CSV, Excel or GeoJSON file, a pandas DataFrame or a geopandas GeoDataFrame), use:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.add_metadata(metadata="./path/to/metadata.csv") # or .xlsx, .geojson etc.

or, if you have a pandas DataFrame or geopandas GeoDataFrame (``metadata_df``):

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.add_metadata(metadata=metadata_df)

.. note:: Specific guidance on preparing your metadata file/dataframe can be found on our :doc:`Input Guidance </using-mapreader/input-guidance/index>` page.

For example, if you have downloaded your maps using the default settings of our ``Download`` subpackage or have set up your directory as recommended in our `Input Guidance </using-mapreader/input-guidance/index>`, you will have a file called ``metadata.csv`` in your ``maps`` directory.
You can load it as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    my_files.add_metadata(metadata="./maps/metadata.csv")

.. admonition:: Advanced usage
    :class: dropdown

    Other arguments you may want to specify when adding metadata to your images include:

    - ``index_col`` - By default, this is set to ``0`` so the first column of your CSV/TSV/Excel spreadsheet will be used as the index column when creating a pandas DataFrame. If you would like to use a different column you can specify ``index_col``.
    - ``usecols`` - By default, the ``add_metadata`` method will add all the columns in your metadata to your ``MapImages`` object. If you would like to add only specific columns, you can pass a list of these as the ``usecols`` argument (e.g. ``usecols=[`name`, `coordinates`, `region`]``) to add only these columns to your ``MapImages`` object.
    - ``ignore_mismatch``- By default, this is set to ``False`` so that an error is given if the images in your ``MapImages`` object are mismatched to your metadata. Setting ``ignore_mismatch`` to ``True`` (by specifying ``ignore_mismatch=True``) will allow you to bypass this error and add mismatched metadata. Only metadata corresponding to images in your ``MapImages`` object will be added.
    - ``delimiter`` - By default, MapReader expects CSV files. If your file is delimited using a different delimiter you should specify the delimiter argument (e.g. a TSV file would require ``delimiter="\t"``).


.. note:: In MapReader versions < 1.0.7, coordinates were miscalculated. To correct this, use the ``add_coords_from_grid_bb`` method to calculate new, correct coordinates.

Patchify
----------

Once you've loaded in all your data, you'll then need to :doc:`'patchify' </introduction-to-mapreader/what-is-mapreader>` your images.

Creating patches from your parent images is a core intellectual and technical task within MapReader.
Choosing the size of your patches (and whether you want to measure them in pixels or in meters) is an important decision and will depend upon the research question you are trying to answer:

- Smaller patches (e.g. 50m x 50m) tend to work well on very large-scale maps (like the 25- or 6-inch Ordnance Survey maps of Britain).
- Larger patches (500m x 500m) will be better suited to slightly smaller-scale maps (for example, 1-inch Ordnance Survey maps).

In any case, the patch size you choose should roughly match the size of the visual feature(s) you want to label.
Ideally your features should be smaller (in any dimension) than your patch size and therefore fully contained within a patch.

To patchify your maps, use:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.patchify_all()

By default, this slices images into 100 x 100 pixel patches which are saved as ``.png`` files in a newly created directory called ``./patches_100_pixel`` (here, ``100`` represents the ``patch_size`` and ``pixel`` represents the method used to slice your parent images).

If you are following our recommended directory structure, after patchifying, your directory should look like this:

::

    project
    ├──your_notebook.ipynb
    └──maps
    │   ├── map1.png
    │   ├── map2.png
    │   ├── map3.png
    │   ├── ...
    │   └── metadata.csv
    └──patches_100_pixel
        ├── patch-0-100-#map1.png#.png
        ├── patch-100-200-#map1.png#.png
        ├── patch-200-300-#map1.png#.png
        └── ...

If you would like to change where your patches are saved, you can change this by specifying ``path_save``.

e.g:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    my_files.patchify_all(path_save="./maps/my_patches_dir")

This will create the following directory structure:

::

    project
    ├──your_notebook.ipynb
    └──maps
        ├── map1.png
        ├── map2.png
        ├── map3.png
        ├── ...
        ├── metadata.csv
        └── my_patches_dir
             ├── patch-0-100-#map1.png#.png
             ├── patch-100-200-#map1.png#.png
             ├── patch-200-300-#map1.png#.png
             └── ...


If you would like to change the size of your patches, you can specify ``patch_size``.

e.g. to slice your maps into 500 x 500 pixel patches:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    my_files.patchify_all(patch_size=500)

This will save your patches as ``.png`` files in a directory called ``patches_500_pixel``.

.. note:: You can combine the above options to change both the directory name in which patches are saved and patch size.

Providing you have loaded geographic coordinates into your ``MapImages`` object, you can also specify ``method = "meters"`` to slice your images by meters instead of pixels.

e.g. to slice your maps into 50 x 50 meter patches:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    my_files.patchify_all(method="meters", patch_size=50)

This will save your patches as ``.png`` files in a directory called ``patches_50_meters``.
As above, you can use the ``path_save`` argument to change where these patches are saved.

MapReader also contains an option to create some overlap between your patches.
This can be useful for text spotting tasks where text may be cut off at the edges of patches.

To add overlap to your patches, use the ``overlap`` argument:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    my_files.patchify_all(patch_size=1024, overlap=0.1)

This will create 1024 x 1024 pixel patches with 10% overlap between each patch.

.. note::
    Greater overlaps will create more patches and result in greater computational costs when running.
    You should be aware of this when choosing your overlap size.

.. admonition:: Advanced usage
    :class: dropdown

    Other arguments you may want to specify when patchifying your images include:

    - ``square_cuts`` - This is a deprecated method and no longer recommended for use. By default, this is set to ``False`` and padding is added to patches at the edges of the parent image to ensure square patches. If you set ``square_cuts=True``, instead of padding, there will be some overlap between edge patches.
    - ``add_to_parent`` - By default, this is set to ``True`` so that each time you run ``patchify_all`` your patches are added to your ``MapImages`` object. Setting it to ``False`` (by specifying ``add_to_parent=False``) will mean your patches are created, but not added to your ``MapImages`` object. This can be useful for testing out different patch sizes.
    - ``rewrite`` - By default, this is set to ``False`` so that if your patches already exist they are not overwritten. Setting it to ``True`` (by specifying ``rewrite=True``) will mean already existing patches are recreated and overwritten.

If you would like to save your patches as geo-referenced tiffs (i.e. geotiffs), use:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.save_patches_as_geotiffs()

This will save each patch in your ``MapImages`` object as a georeferenced ``.tif`` file in your patches directory.

.. note:: MapReader also has a ``save_parents_as_geotiff`` method for saving parent images as geotiffs.

After running the ``patchify_all`` method, you'll see that ``print(my_files)`` shows you have both 'parents' and 'patches'.
To view an iterable list of these, you can use the ``list_parents`` and ``list_patches`` methods:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_list = my_files.list_parents()
    patch_list = my_files.list_patches()

    print(parent_list)
    print(patch_list[0:5])  # too many to print them all!

Having these list saved as variables can be useful later on in the pipeline.

It can also be useful to create dataframes from your ``MapImages`` objects.
To do this, use:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_df, patch_df = my_files.convert_images()

Then, to view these, use:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_df

or

.. code-block:: python

    patch_df

.. note:: These parent and patch dataframes **will not** automatically update so you will want to run this command again if you add new information into your ``MapImages`` object.

At any point, you can also save these dataframes by passing the ``save`` argument to the ``convert_images`` method:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_df, patch_df = my_files.convert_images(save=True)

By default, this will save your parent and patch dataframes as ``parent_df.csv`` and ``patch_df.csv`` respectively.

If instead, you'd like to save them as excel files, use ``save_format="excel"``:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_df, patch_df = my_files.convert_images(save=True, save_format="excel")

or, if you'd like to save them as a geojson file, use ``save_format="geojson"``:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_df, patch_df = my_files.convert_images(save=True, save_format="geojson")

Alternatively, you can save your patch metadata in a GeoJSON file using:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.save_patches_to_geojson()

By default, this will save all the metadata for your patches in a newly created ``patches.geojson`` file.

.. note:: The patch images are **not** saved within this file, only the metadata and patch coordinates.

Visualize (optional)
---------------------

To view a random sample of your images, use:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.show_sample(num_samples=3)

.. image:: /_static/show_sample_parent.png
    :width: 400px


By default, this will show you a random sample of your parent images.

If, however, you want to see a random sample of your patches use the ``tree_level="patch"`` argument:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.show_sample(num_samples=3, tree_level="patch")

.. image:: /_static/show_sample_child.png
    :width: 400px


It can also be helpful to see all your patches in the context of their parent image.
To do this use the ``show_patches`` method:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_list = my_files.list_parents()
    my_files.show_patches(parent_list[0])

.. image:: /_static/show_par.png
    :width: 400px


.. admonition:: Advanced usage
    :class: dropdown

    Further usage of the ``show_patches`` method is detailed in :ref:`Further_analysis`.
    Please head there for guidance on advanced usage.


If you maps and patches are georeferenced, you can also use the `explore_patches` method to view your patches on a map.

For example, to view your patches overlaid on an OpenStreetMap.Mapnik layer (the default), use:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_list = my_files.list_parents()
    my_files.explore_patches(parent_list[0])


Or, if your maps are taken from a tilelayer, you can specify the URL of the tilelayer you'd like to use as the base map:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_list = my_files.list_parents()
    my_files.explore_patches(
        parent_list[0],
        xyz_url="https://geo.nls.uk/mapdata3/os/6inchfirst/{z}/{x}/{y}.png"
    )

.. admonition:: Advanced usage
    :class: dropdown

    Further usage of the ``explore_patches`` method is detailed in :ref:`Further_analysis`.
    Please head there for guidance on advanced usage.


.. todo:: Move 'Further analysis/visualization' to a different page (e.g. as an appendix)

.. _Further_analysis:

Further analysis/visualization (optional)
-------------------------------------------

If you have loaded geographic coordinates into your ``MapImages`` object, you may want to calculate the central coordinates of your patches.
The ``add_center_coord`` method can used to do this:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.add_center_coord()

You can then rerun the ``convert_images`` method to see your results.

i.e.:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_df, patch_df = my_files.convert_images()
    patch_df.head()

You will see that center coordinates of each patch have been added to your patch dataframe.

The ``calc_pixel_stats`` method can be used to calculate means and standard deviations of pixel intensities of each of your patches:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.calc_pixel_stats()

After rerunning the ``convert_images`` method (as above), you will see that mean and standard pixel intensities have been added to your patch dataframe.

The ``show_patches`` and ``explore_patches`` methods can be used to plot these values on top of your patches.
This is done by specifying the ``column_to_plot`` argument.

e.g. to view "mean_pixel_R" on your patches with the ``show_patches`` method:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    parent_list = my_files.list_parents()
    my_files.show_patches(
        parent_list[0],
        column_to_plot="mean_pixel_R"
    )

.. image:: /_static/show_par_RGB.png
    :width: 400px

If you want to see your image underneath, you can specify the ``alpha`` argument, which sets the transparency of your plotted values.
The value of ``alpha`` can range between 0 and 1, with lower ``alpha`` values allowing you to see the more of the image underneath.

e.g. to view "mean_pixel_R" on your patches:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    parent_list = my_files.list_parents()
    my_files.show_parent(
        parent_list[0],
        column_to_plot="mean_pixel_R",
        alpha=0.5
    )

.. image:: /_static/show_par_RGB_0.5.png
    :width: 400px

Or, if your maps are georeferenced, you can use the ``explore_patches`` method to view your patches on a map.

e.g. to view "mean_pixel_R" on your patches:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    parent_list = my_files.list_parents()
    my_files.explore_patches(
        parent_list[0],
        column_to_plot="mean_pixel_R",
        xyz_url="https://geo.nls.uk/mapdata3/os/6inchfirst/{z}/{x}/{y}.png"
    )

.. admonition:: Advanced usage
    :class: dropdown

    Other arguments you may want to specify when viewing your images (for both the ``show_patches`` and ``explore_patches`` methods):

    - ``categorical`` - By default, this is set to ``False`` and so will be inferred. If you have a categorical numerical variable you would like to plot, you can set this to ``True``.
    - ``cmap`` - By default, this is set to ``"viridis"```. Any of the color maps found `here <https://matplotlib.org/stable/tutorials/colors/colormaps.html>`__ can be used instead.
    - ``vmin`` and ``vmax`` - By default, these are set to ``None`` and so will be inferred. If you would like to specify the range of your color map, you can do so by setting these arguments.
    - ``style_kwargs`` - This is a dictionary of arguments that is passed to the plotting tool. You can use this to customize your plots further.


.. todo:: Move 'Further analysis/visualization' to a different page (e.g. as an appendix)

Commit message:

add skip_blank_patches arg to docs

docs/source/using-mapreader/step-by-step-guide/2-load.rst, after:

Load
=====

.. note:: Run these commands in a Jupyter notebook (or other IDE), ensuring you are in your ``mr_py38`` Python environment.

.. note:: You will need to update file paths to reflect your own machines directory structure.

MapReader's ``Load`` subpackage is used to load, visualize and patchify images (e.g. maps) saved locally.

Load images (and metadata)
----------------------------

First, images (e.g. png, jpeg, tiff or geotiff files) can be loaded in using MapReader's ``loader`` function.

This can be done using:

.. code-block:: python

    from mapreader import loader

    my_files = loader("./path/to/files/*.png")

or

.. code-block:: python

    from mapreader import loader

    my_files = loader("./path/to/files/", file_ext="png")

For example, if you have downloaded your maps using the default settings of our ``Download`` subpackage or have set up your directory as recommended in our :doc:`Input Guidance </using-mapreader/input-guidance/index>`:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    my_files = loader("./maps/*.png")

or

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    my_files = loader("./maps", file_ext="png")

The ``loader`` function creates a ``MapImages`` object (``my_files``) which contains information about your map images.
To see the contents of this object, use:

.. code-block:: python

    print(my_files)

You will see that your ``MapImages`` object contains the files you have loaded and that these are labelled as 'parents'.

If your image files are georeferenced and already contain metadata (e.g. geoTIFFs), you can add this metadata into your ``MapImages`` object using:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.add_geo_info()

.. note:: This function will reproject your coordinates into "EPSG:4326". To change this specify ``target_crs``.

Or, if you have separate metadata (e.g. a CSV, Excel or GeoJSON file, a pandas DataFrame or a geopandas GeoDataFrame), use:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.add_metadata(metadata="./path/to/metadata.csv") # or .xlsx, .geojson etc.

or, if you have a pandas DataFrame or geopandas GeoDataFrame (``metadata_df``):

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.add_metadata(metadata=metadata_df)

.. note:: Specific guidance on preparing your metadata file/dataframe can be found on our :doc:`Input Guidance </using-mapreader/input-guidance/index>` page.

For example, if you have downloaded your maps using the default settings of our ``Download`` subpackage or have set up your directory as recommended in our `Input Guidance </using-mapreader/input-guidance/index>`, you will have a file called ``metadata.csv`` in your ``maps`` directory.
You can load it as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    my_files.add_metadata(metadata="./maps/metadata.csv")

.. admonition:: Advanced usage
    :class: dropdown

    Other arguments you may want to specify when adding metadata to your images include:

    - ``index_col`` - By default, this is set to ``0`` so the first column of your CSV/TSV/Excel spreadsheet will be used as the index column when creating a pandas DataFrame. If you would like to use a different column you can specify ``index_col``.
    - ``usecols`` - By default, the ``add_metadata`` method will add all the columns in your metadata to your ``MapImages`` object. If you would like to add only specific columns, you can pass a list of these as the ``usecols`` argument (e.g. ``usecols=[`name`, `coordinates`, `region`]``) to add only these columns to your ``MapImages`` object.
    - ``ignore_mismatch``- By default, this is set to ``False`` so that an error is given if the images in your ``MapImages`` object are mismatched to your metadata. Setting ``ignore_mismatch`` to ``True`` (by specifying ``ignore_mismatch=True``) will allow you to bypass this error and add mismatched metadata. Only metadata corresponding to images in your ``MapImages`` object will be added.
    - ``delimiter`` - By default, MapReader expects CSV files. If your file is delimited using a different delimiter you should specify the delimiter argument (e.g. a TSV file would require ``delimiter="\t"``).


.. note:: In MapReader versions < 1.0.7, coordinates were miscalculated. To correct this, use the ``add_coords_from_grid_bb`` method to calculate new, correct coordinates.

Patchify
----------

Once you've loaded in all your data, you'll then need to :doc:`'patchify' </introduction-to-mapreader/what-is-mapreader>` your images.

Creating patches from your parent images is a core intellectual and technical task within MapReader.
Choosing the size of your patches (and whether you want to measure them in pixels or in meters) is an important decision and will depend upon the research question you are trying to answer:

- Smaller patches (e.g. 50m x 50m) tend to work well on very large-scale maps (like the 25- or 6-inch Ordnance Survey maps of Britain).
- Larger patches (500m x 500m) will be better suited to slightly smaller-scale maps (for example, 1-inch Ordnance Survey maps).

In any case, the patch size you choose should roughly match the size of the visual feature(s) you want to label.
Ideally your features should be smaller (in any dimension) than your patch size and therefore fully contained within a patch.

To patchify your maps, use:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.patchify_all()

By default, this slices images into 100 x 100 pixel patches which are saved as ``.png`` files in a newly created directory called ``./patches_100_pixel`` (here, ``100`` represents the ``patch_size`` and ``pixel`` represents the method used to slice your parent images).

If you are following our recommended directory structure, after patchifying, your directory should look like this:

::

    project
    ├──your_notebook.ipynb
    └──maps
    │   ├── map1.png
    │   ├── map2.png
    │   ├── map3.png
    │   ├── ...
    │   └── metadata.csv
    └──patches_100_pixel
        ├── patch-0-100-#map1.png#.png
        ├── patch-100-200-#map1.png#.png
        ├── patch-200-300-#map1.png#.png
        └── ...

If you would like to change where your patches are saved, you can change this by specifying ``path_save``.

e.g:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    my_files.patchify_all(path_save="./maps/my_patches_dir")

This will create the following directory structure:

::

    project
    ├──your_notebook.ipynb
    └──maps
        ├── map1.png
        ├── map2.png
        ├── map3.png
        ├── ...
        ├── metadata.csv
        └── my_patches_dir
             ├── patch-0-100-#map1.png#.png
             ├── patch-100-200-#map1.png#.png
             ├── patch-200-300-#map1.png#.png
             └── ...


If you would like to change the size of your patches, you can specify ``patch_size``.

e.g. to slice your maps into 500 x 500 pixel patches:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    my_files.patchify_all(patch_size=500)

This will save your patches as ``.png`` files in a directory called ``patches_500_pixel``.

.. note:: You can combine the above options to change both the directory name in which patches are saved and patch size.

Providing you have loaded geographic coordinates into your ``MapImages`` object, you can also specify ``method = "meters"`` to slice your images by meters instead of pixels.

e.g. to slice your maps into 50 x 50 meter patches:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    my_files.patchify_all(method="meters", patch_size=50)

This will save your patches as ``.png`` files in a directory called ``patches_50_meters``.
As above, you can use the ``path_save`` argument to change where these patches are saved.

MapReader also contains an option to create some overlap between your patches.
This can be useful for text spotting tasks where text may be cut off at the edges of patches.

To add overlap to your patches, use the ``overlap`` argument:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    my_files.patchify_all(patch_size=1024, overlap=0.1)

This will create 1024 x 1024 pixel patches with 10% overlap between each patch.

.. note::
    Greater overlaps will create more patches and result in greater computational costs when running.
    You should be aware of this when choosing your overlap size.

.. admonition:: Advanced usage
    :class: dropdown

    Other arguments you may want to specify when patchifying your images include:

    - ``square_cuts`` - This is a deprecated method and no longer recommended for use. By default, this is set to ``False`` and padding is added to patches at the edges of the parent image to ensure square patches. If you set ``square_cuts=True``, instead of padding, there will be some overlap between edge patches.
    - ``add_to_parent`` - By default, this is set to ``True`` so that each time you run ``patchify_all`` your patches are added to your ``MapImages`` object. Setting it to ``False`` (by specifying ``add_to_parent=False``) will mean your patches are created, but not added to your ``MapImages`` object. This can be useful for testing out different patch sizes.
    - ``rewrite`` - By default, this is set to ``False`` so that if your patches already exist they are not overwritten. Setting it to ``True`` (by specifying ``rewrite=True``) will mean already existing patches are recreated and overwritten.
    - ``skip_blank_patches`` - By default, this is set to ``False``. Setting to ``True`` will omit any patches that only contain ``0`` values, which can speed up processing on irregularly shaped map images that have empty regions. The `Image.getbbox() <https://pillow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/Image.html#PIL.Image.Image.getbbox>`_ method is used to determine if a patch is blank.

If you would like to save your patches as geo-referenced tiffs (i.e. geotiffs), use:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.save_patches_as_geotiffs()

This will save each patch in your ``MapImages`` object as a georeferenced ``.tif`` file in your patches directory.

.. note:: MapReader also has a ``save_parents_as_geotiff`` method for saving parent images as geotiffs.

After running the ``patchify_all`` method, you'll see that ``print(my_files)`` shows you have both 'parents' and 'patches'.
To view an iterable list of these, you can use the ``list_parents`` and ``list_patches`` methods:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_list = my_files.list_parents()
    patch_list = my_files.list_patches()

    print(parent_list)
    print(patch_list[0:5])  # too many to print them all!

Having these list saved as variables can be useful later on in the pipeline.

It can also be useful to create dataframes from your ``MapImages`` objects.
To do this, use:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_df, patch_df = my_files.convert_images()

Then, to view these, use:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_df

or

.. code-block:: python

    patch_df

.. note:: These parent and patch dataframes **will not** automatically update so you will want to run this command again if you add new information into your ``MapImages`` object.

At any point, you can also save these dataframes by passing the ``save`` argument to the ``convert_images`` method:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_df, patch_df = my_files.convert_images(save=True)

By default, this will save your parent and patch dataframes as ``parent_df.csv`` and ``patch_df.csv`` respectively.

If instead, you'd like to save them as excel files, use ``save_format="excel"``:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_df, patch_df = my_files.convert_images(save=True, save_format="excel")

or, if you'd like to save them as a geojson file, use ``save_format="geojson"``:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_df, patch_df = my_files.convert_images(save=True, save_format="geojson")

Alternatively, you can save your patch metadata in a GeoJSON file using:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.save_patches_to_geojson()

By default, this will save all the metadata for your patches in a newly created ``patches.geojson`` file.

.. note:: The patch images are **not** saved within this file, only the metadata and patch coordinates.

Visualize (optional)
---------------------

To view a random sample of your images, use:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.show_sample(num_samples=3)

.. image:: /_static/show_sample_parent.png
    :width: 400px


By default, this will show you a random sample of your parent images.

If, however, you want to see a random sample of your patches use the ``tree_level="patch"`` argument:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.show_sample(num_samples=3, tree_level="patch")

.. image:: /_static/show_sample_child.png
    :width: 400px


It can also be helpful to see all your patches in the context of their parent image.
To do this use the ``show_patches`` method:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_list = my_files.list_parents()
    my_files.show_patches(parent_list[0])

.. image:: /_static/show_par.png
    :width: 400px


.. admonition:: Advanced usage
    :class: dropdown

    Further usage of the ``show_patches`` method is detailed in :ref:`Further_analysis`.
    Please head there for guidance on advanced usage.


If you maps and patches are georeferenced, you can also use the `explore_patches` method to view your patches on a map.

For example, to view your patches overlaid on an OpenStreetMap.Mapnik layer (the default), use:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_list = my_files.list_parents()
    my_files.explore_patches(parent_list[0])


Or, if your maps are taken from a tilelayer, you can specify the URL of the tilelayer you'd like to use as the base map:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_list = my_files.list_parents()
    my_files.explore_patches(
        parent_list[0],
        xyz_url="https://geo.nls.uk/mapdata3/os/6inchfirst/{z}/{x}/{y}.png"
    )

.. admonition:: Advanced usage
    :class: dropdown

    Further usage of the ``explore_patches`` method is detailed in :ref:`Further_analysis`.
    Please head there for guidance on advanced usage.


.. todo:: Move 'Further analysis/visualization' to a different page (e.g. as an appendix)

.. _Further_analysis:

Further analysis/visualization (optional)
-------------------------------------------

If you have loaded geographic coordinates into your ``MapImages`` object, you may want to calculate the central coordinates of your patches.
The ``add_center_coord`` method can used to do this:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.add_center_coord()

You can then rerun the ``convert_images`` method to see your results.

i.e.:

.. code-block:: python

    parent_df, patch_df = my_files.convert_images()
    patch_df.head()

You will see that center coordinates of each patch have been added to your patch dataframe.

The ``calc_pixel_stats`` method can be used to calculate means and standard deviations of pixel intensities of each of your patches:

.. code-block:: python

    my_files.calc_pixel_stats()

After rerunning the ``convert_images`` method (as above), you will see that mean and standard pixel intensities have been added to your patch dataframe.

The ``show_patches`` and ``explore_patches`` methods can be used to plot these values on top of your patches.
This is done by specifying the ``column_to_plot`` argument.

e.g. to view "mean_pixel_R" on your patches with the ``show_patches`` method:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    parent_list = my_files.list_parents()
    my_files.show_patches(
        parent_list[0],
        column_to_plot="mean_pixel_R"
    )

.. image:: /_static/show_par_RGB.png
    :width: 400px

If you want to see your image underneath, you can specify the ``alpha`` argument, which sets the transparency of your plotted values.
The value of ``alpha`` can range between 0 and 1, with lower ``alpha`` values allowing you to see the more of the image underneath.

e.g. to view "mean_pixel_R" on your patches:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    parent_list = my_files.list_parents()
    my_files.show_parent(
        parent_list[0],
        column_to_plot="mean_pixel_R",
        alpha=0.5
    )

.. image:: /_static/show_par_RGB_0.5.png
    :width: 400px

Or, if your maps are georeferenced, you can use the ``explore_patches`` method to view your patches on a map.

e.g. to view "mean_pixel_R" on your patches:

.. code-block:: python

    #EXAMPLE
    parent_list = my_files.list_parents()
    my_files.explore_patches(
        parent_list[0],
        column_to_plot="mean_pixel_R",
        xyz_url="https://geo.nls.uk/mapdata3/os/6inchfirst/{z}/{x}/{y}.png"
    )

.. admonition:: Advanced usage
    :class: dropdown

    Other arguments you may want to specify when viewing your images (for both the ``show_patches`` and ``explore_patches`` methods):

    - ``categorical`` - By default, this is set to ``False`` and so will be inferred. If you have a categorical numerical variable you would like to plot, you can set this to ``True``.
    - ``cmap`` - By default, this is set to ``"viridis"```. Any of the color maps found `here <https://matplotlib.org/stable/tutorials/colors/colormaps.html>`__ can be used instead.
    - ``vmin`` and ``vmax`` - By default, these are set to ``None`` and so will be inferred. If you would like to specify the range of your color map, you can do so by setting these arguments.
    - ``style_kwargs`` - This is a dictionary of arguments that is passed to the plotting tool. You can use this to customize your plots further.


.. todo:: Move 'Further analysis/visualization' to a different page (e.g. as an appendix)
